.TH SCX_QUICKSCHED 1 "2026-05-28" "Quicksched" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
scx_quicksched \- latency-optimised sched_ext CPU scheduler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B scx_quicksched
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBscx_quicksched\fR (Quicksched) is a BPF-based CPU scheduler that replaces
the kernel's default CFS scheduler using the \fIsched_ext\fR framework
(kernel \(>= 6.12).
.PP
Tasks are classified as \fIinteractive\fR or \fIbatch\fR based on their nice
value and historical sleep ratio.  Interactive tasks receive a short time slice
and run at full CPU frequency; batch tasks receive a longer slice and are
throttled to a configurable fraction of maximum frequency.  Tasks performing
direct memory reclaim (\fBPF_MEMALLOC\fR) are always forced to the batch
queue.  Tasks whose slice-utilisation EWMA falls below 40% are treated as
memory-stall-bound and capped at batch CPU frequency regardless of their
interactive classification.
.PP
Requires root and \fBCONFIG_SCHED_CLASS_EXT=y\fR.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-interactive\-slice\-us " " \fIN\fR
Interactive task time slice in microseconds (default: \fB5000\fR).
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-batch\-slice\-us " " \fIN\fR
Batch task time slice in microseconds (default: \fB20000\fR).
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-nice\-interactive\-max " " \fIN\fR
Tasks with nice \(<= \fIN\fR are unconditionally interactive (default: \fB0\fR).
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-interactive\-sleep\-pct " " \fIN\fR
Minimum lifetime sleep percentage for interactive classification (default: \fB50\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-batch\-cpuperf\-pct " " \fIN\fR
CPU frequency cap for batch tasks, as a percentage of the hardware maximum
(default: \fB50\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-cpuperf
Disable CPU frequency scaling entirely.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-tui
Plain text output instead of the ncurses TUI.  Useful for running under
systemd or in scripts.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Load and verify the BPF object, then exit without attaching the scheduler.
Useful for checking kernel compatibility without replacing the running scheduler.
.TP
.B \-\-mem\-pressure\-pct " " \fIN\fR
When PSI memory pressure \fIsome avg10\fR exceeds \fIN\fR percent, halve the
batch CPU frequency cap until pressure subsides (default: 0 = off).
Requires \fI/proc/pressure/memory\fR (Linux 4.20+).
.TP
.B \-\-slo\-us " " \fIN\fR
Alert when p99 wakeup latency exceeds \fIN\fR microseconds (default: 0 = off).
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-stats\-interval " " \fIN\fR
Stats reporting interval in seconds (default: \fB1\fR).  Set to 0 to disable
stats output while still running the scheduler.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose libbpf diagnostic output.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH TASK CLASSIFICATION
A task is \fIinteractive\fR when any of the following hold:
.IP \[bu] 2
It has a negative nice value.
.IP \[bu]
Its nice value is \(<= \fB\-\-nice\-interactive\-max\fR.
.IP \[bu]
After accumulating at least 4 wakeups, its lifetime sleep time is \(>=
\fB\-\-interactive\-sleep\-pct\fR percent.
.PP
Kernel threads are always classified as batch.
.SH KERNEL COMPATIBILITY
.TS
tab(@) allbox;
lb lb
l l.
Kernel@Status
< 6.12@Not supported (no sched_ext)
6.12 \(en 6.16@Fully supported
6.17+@Supported; requires BPF_PROG context wrapper (bundled)
.TE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /sys/kernel/sched_ext
sched_ext control directory.  Present only when the running kernel was built
with \fBCONFIG_SCHED_CLASS_EXT=y\fR.
.TP
.I /lib/systemd/system/scx_quicksched.service
systemd unit installed by \fBmake install\fR.
.SH EXAMPLES
Run with the interactive TUI:
.RS
.nf
sudo scx_quicksched
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run as a systemd service:
.RS
.nf
sudo make install
sudo systemctl enable --now scx_quicksched
.fi
.RE
.PP
Tune for an audio workstation (2 ms interactive slice, batch at 25% freq):
.RS
.nf
sudo scx_quicksched \-i 2000 \-\-batch\-cpuperf\-pct 25
.fi
.RE
.SH SAFETY
When the \fBscx_quicksched\fR process exits or is killed, the BPF struct_ops
link is released and the kernel automatically reverts all tasks to CFS.  The
scheduler also sets \fBtimeout_ms\fR in the ops struct so that the kernel will
self-revert if any task fails to make progress for more than 30 seconds.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR chrt (1),
.BR nice (1),
.BR renice (1),
.BR systemctl (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Aniketh T S and contributors.
